
1. Introduction
-----------------

Welcome to the Astronomical Image Reduction TOOLSet!

The present text file is intended to help you to get started with the
AIRTOOLS software. The main purpose of this software is to provide tools to
analyze comet observation images and to obtain photometric measurements of the
total coma brightness.

The AIRTOOLS software is running on a Linux operating system. For instructions
on running such a Linux system on a Windows or Mac computer please consult the
README.Windows file first.

For an installation procedure on a running Linux system please visit the
INSTALL file.


2. Image Preparation
----------------------

In principle, the AIRTOOLS software is capable of doing all basic astronomical
image processing starting with a set of raw uncalibrated CCD or DSLR images
and applying bias-, dark-, flatfield correction and registration to build
image stacks. But this is not covered in this guide because most users do
already have their own pipeline using other - more commonly used - software
to achieve the same results.

However, there are certain requirements which must be met to use those images
with the AIRTOOLS software. Most important, it is required that the stacked
images have a linear response between collected photons and measured counts
(ADU). Ideally the counts should be at approximately the same level as is
measured in a single bias subtracted raw exposure. Images of lower bit depth
(e.g. from DSLR cameras) might optionally be stretched to the 16bit range.
In addition it is strongly advised to not subtract any background (e.g. sky
background gradients) at this stage.

At the end of your comet image processing you should have created two stacked
images: one centered on stars (hereafter referred to as star stack) and another
one centered on the comet (called comet stack).

Now, those images must be handed over to the computer where the AIRTOOLS
software is installed (running a Linux operating system). The stacked images
(and ideally the individual original raw image files) are most easily
transfered by using an USB pen drive or disk.
If you are running a Linux OS inside the VirtualBox software on a Windows or
Mac computer then you must connect the USB drive by using the VirtualBox VM
menu "Drives". Choose the appropriate drive under the USB submenu. Once
connected, the USB drive appears in form of a new icon on the Linux desktop
(inside the virtual machine window). You are not required to copy the image
files to the Linux file system.



2. Creating a new Project
---------------------------

Usually an observation of a single target consists of multiple bracketed
exposures - called an image set. During one night it is quite common to
observe several targets (comets). It is possible that different instruments
(telescopes, filters, cameras) are used.
All thoses images of a single night are grouped to build a project. Any files
based on those images and created by AIRTOOLS tasks are stored under the
project directory.
All project directories are placed under the AIRTOOLS base directory which
should be on a disk with sufficient space (count about 1-2 GB per project).

New projects can be created by the help of the AIRTOOLS launcher - the icon
which was created at the end of the AIRTOOLS installation procedure. Moreover,
this launcher takes care of creating new entries in several metadata files: The
description of all image sets within a project is stored in a table organized
text file (set.dat) and some information about telescopes and camears as well
as data for observation sites is hold in additional files (e.g. camera.dat,
sites.dat).

Upon first time use of the AIRTOOLS launcher you will
- define the AIRTOOLS projects base directory
- select a date (beginning of night) which defines a new project
- press ok to start next form for new site definition
- press ok to start next form for an image set definition
- press ok to start next form for new instrument definition
- press ok to start final form for image stack file selection and launch the
  graphical user interface (GUI)

The new entries of your observatory site and instrument are added to a few
predefined entries and available for selection upon next invocation of the
launcher.

Nevertheless, more experienced users might prefer to directly edit those
metadata files by using a text editor. In this case you should know that
files under the project directory are used for the given project only whereas
metadata files under the base directory serve as templates for newly created
projects.



3. AIRTOOLS GUI start
-----------------------

The AIRTOOLS launcher finally converts your stacked FITS images, checks some
header information and starts the graphical user interface. The star stack and
comet stack images are loaded in a new SAOImage window. The AIRTOOLS tasks are
now available from the "Analysis" menu (bottom entries).

The SAOImage software comes with extensive inline help ("Help" menu). You
should get familiar with some very basic interactive operations at first:
- using Tab key to switch between loaded images
- using left mouse presses to define an image region
- using middle mouse click to set new image display center
- using right mouse press and drag to adjust brightness/contrast
- using the mouse wheel to zoom in/out

Before starting with the more advanced AIRTOOLS tasks it is recommended that
you check the orientation of your images. Unfortunately this can not
unambiguousely determined from image header information because different
data acquisition and stacking software use different origins for image pixel
coordinates (different interpretation of FITS file data order). The best way
of checking is to compare the displayed images with a known image (e.g. from
Palomar Digital Sky Survey).

TODO: image flipping

Please note that you do not need to rotate your stacked images to align the top
of the image with north direction.



4. Comet photometry
---------------------

The usual processing pipeline involves the following steps:
- Astrometric calibration
- Background gradient removal
- PSF extraction
- Comet extraction
- Photometrc calibration

Each task is invoked by either selecting the appropriate "Analysis" menu item
or by using a keyboard shortcut (e.g. key "w" will start the astrometric
calibration task). Usually a task will take a couple of parameters the user
may provide by filling in entries of a simple form window. For example, the
astrometric calibration task uses a parameter for the approximate position
angle of the true north direction (counting from top of the image towards
left). If this text entry is left empty then the value from the instrument
metadata file camera.dat is used.

After starting a task a text window opens and displays some output showing
intermittent results and informations. The output of all tasks is copied to a
log file (ds9cmd.log) in the projects working directory for later reference or
error tracking.

During the analysis tasks a number of files and directories is created, e.g.
- directory wcs will hold files related to the astrometric calibration
- directory comet with PSF images and region files for measuring the comet and
  the sky background
- directory phot with files related to the photometric calibration.
After finishing your image reduction, you may savely remove some temporary
files (file name prefix x.) from your projects working directory.



5. Additional Help
--------------------

AIRTOOLS Manual: https://github.com/ewelot/airtools/blob/master/doc/manual-de.md
 (english version in preparation)
Screencast video at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sK9D_M06ovA
E-Mail contact: Do not hesitate to ask any questions via private mail to
t_lehmann (at) freenet (dot) de
